# Newton vs Einstein

Newton is plain and simple, but einstein is complex.
Special theory of relativity is simple but general theory
is hard.

## Special theory of relativity

Inertial frame is defined as the one which follows newton's second law.
If it doesn't it is non-inertial frame, one common reference is a rotating
sphere.

Newton said time is independent of reference frame.

If two inertial reference frames coincide (origins) at t=0, and
also at $t=t'$, where $t'$ is time measure about other inertial frame.

$$ x' = x - v_xt $$
$$ y' = y - v_yt $$
$$ z' = z - v_zt $$
$$ t' = t $$

and so on. where x,y,z are the coordinates in different inertial frames.

Here are postulates of special theory of relativity:

1. The equations describing the basic laws of physics are the same in all
   inertial frames. (include newton and maxwell laws).
1. The speed of light }in vacuum $(\mu_r = 1, \epsilon_r = 1)$, has the same value $c$ in all
   inertial frames of reference.

This is because speed of light can be
naturally derived from maxwell's laws, if maxwell's laws are valid then this is
also valid

If we use above law that means that galilean transformations do not hold true.

Thus we have to use some new type of transformation called Lorentz
transformations for this to hold true:

If we are measuring the distance travelled by light in two different inertial
frames, we get:

$$ c^2t^2 = x^2 + y^2 + z^2 $$
$$ c^2t'^2 = x'^2 + y'^2 + z'^2 $$

Lorentz transformation is given by:

$$ x' = \gamma(x - v_xt) $$
$$ y' = \gamma(y - v_yt) $$
$$ z' = \gamma(z - v_zt) $$
$$ t' = \gamma(t - \frac{vr}{c^2}) $$

Thus unlike newton's time is not absolute.
The spacetime seperation given by
$$ (\Delta s)^2 = -c^2 (\Delta t)^2 + (\Delta l)^2 $$
$$ (\Delta s)^2 = -c^2 (t_1 - t_2)^2 + (x_1 - x_2)^2 + (y_1 - y_2)^2 + (z_1 - z_2)^2 $$
is constant.

### General theory of relativity

According to fermat's principle light travels in the shortest route,
then in an accelerated frame, the gravity is bending if equivalence principle
is true then both senarios of light bending?
